# 2. Anatomic Localization of Clinical Events and Relapses

A key objective of the **_Relapse Navigator_** is relapse localization. This includes accurate localization of event-related symptoms, not leaving objective new examination deficits unexplained, and accounting for multifocal relapses. Based on presenting symptoms of a clinical event, adjudication is conducted in one or more of 5 **_Relapse Navigator_** modules: optic nerve, spinal cord, area postrema, brainstem and brain.

Symptoms of optic neuritis and area postrema syndrome are “specific” in the sense that they each apply to a single module. Thus, the occurrence of new eye pain and visual symptoms will activate the optic neuritis module whereas presentation with nausea, vomiting, and/or hiccups will activate the area postrema module.

In contrast, spinal cord, brainstem and brain relapses may present with “specific” localizing symptoms such as diplopia (brainstem) or truncal sensory level (spinal cord). However, motor and sensory symptoms may be “nonspecific” symptoms and not confidently localized to one neuroanatomic region. For instance, unilateral limb weakness without a truncal sensory level is considered non-localizing. Given the much higher frequency of myelitis in NMOSD, isolated unilateral limb weakness will more likely be caused by myelitis than a brainstem or brain relapse. Thus, when a “nonspecific” motor or sensory event is identified in the absence of other clinical features localizing to the brainstem or brain, it will be first adjudicated as a possible myelitis relapse. However, if the event is not adjudicated as a spinal cord relapse after review of MRI evidence and there remains sufficient unexplained motor or sensory examination change (i.e., meeting a threshold to warrant MRI), the **Relapse Navigator** automatically shifts the assessment to review of the brain MRI. If that MRI reveals a potential new and/or gadolinium enhancing lesion in the brain and/or brainstem, the evaluator is directed to the appropriate module for assessment and adjudication. For these reasons, motor and sensory exam findings are recorded for adjudication of any potential spinal cord, brain or brainstem relapse.

Similarly, if a “specific” localizing symptom is present that directs the clinician to either the brainstem (e.g., diplopia) or brain (e.g., anorexia) module, but there is also evidence of a “nonspecific” motor or sensory deficit (e.g., coexistent unilateral limb weakness), the evaluator will be first directed to the specific module to review the clinical data and request a brain MRI to determine if there is a responsible NMOSD lesion and that the lesion is not more consistent with an alternative pathology. The evaluating clinician is asked whether the lesion provides adequate explanation for all the presenting symptoms. In the event that 1) a lesion is not found or 2) the lesion does not account for some or all of the presenting symptoms, the evaluator will be directed to the spinal cord module to determine whether spinal cord localization can explain a particular “nonspecific” symptom, if appropriate (e.g., motor weakness or sensory loss).

Occasionally, patients may have acute relapses that affect multiple systems, such as optic nerve and spinal cord. The **Relapse Navigator** will activate both modules. Similarly, if not all symptoms initially thought to be potentially explained by a brain or brainstem lesion are explained by the lesion uncovered, the evaluator will be directed to evaluate for a potential spinal cord lesion.
