---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Preface

The Guthy-Jackson Charitable Foundation (GJCF) mission is to advance basic, clinical and translational research to accelerate development of safe and effective treatments and ultimately cures for neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders (NMOSD) and related disorders.

The GJCF **_Relapse Navigator_**  is a digital, interactive tool to facilitate the standardized adjudication of relapses in patients previously diagnosed with NMOSD. It was designed to build upon methods of relapse adjudication that were used in the first generation of therapeutic clinical trials that led to FDA approval of therapeutics for relapse prevention in NMOSD with aquaporin-4 antibodies (anti-AQP4). Similar approaches are used for relapse adjudication for anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (anti-MOG) associated disease (MOGAD) as well as NMOSD cases seronegative for both anti-AQP4 and anti-MOG. **_Relapse Navigator_** may be adaptable to adjudicate potential relapses in MOGAD or seronegative NMOSD.

The **_Relapse Navigator_** tool was developed to help neurologists to adjudicate clinical events of patients with NMOSD in a standardized manner implementing best clinical practices. It was optimized for use in context of clinical trials so as to determine whether a clinical event meets requisite criteria for relapse. However, it may also be used to help guide and improve consistency of relapse identification in the routine management of patients with NMOSD. The **_Relapse Navigator_**  may also have utility in research, including facilitating relapse diagnostic accuracy and inter-rater agreement. Please note that this instrument was not designed for patient self-adjudication of potential relapse.

The GJCF **_Relapse Navigator_**  guides users through a set of automated algorithms to aid in objective and reproducible adjudication of potential NMOSD relapse using findings from clinical neurological examination. The instrument is intended to facilitate standardized relapse adjudication—but not replace clinical judgement. The key outputs of the instrument provide information regarding three aspects of a potential NMO relapse: **_1)_** binary adjudication (yes / no) of a clinical episode as a relapse or not; **_2)_** for an adjudicated relapse, localization of the affected area(s) of the central nervous system based on standard rules of neurological localization; and **_3)_** for an adjudicated relapse, the severity score of the relapse in the involved anatomic module(s). The current **_Relapse Navigator_**  is version 1.0; updated versions are anticipated to be forthcoming as the instrument gains performance experience.

**Important Note**: the ultimate adjudication of relapses remains the responsibility of the treating neurologist. All users of the GJCF **_Relapse Navigator_**  agree to indemnify and hold-harmless GJCF, the **_Relapse Navigator_**  development committee, instrument development team, reference manual writing team and operational logistics team from all forms of liability, implied or expressed.
